This post is written by Sara Hendery, communications coordinator at the Center for International Research, Education, and Development at Virginia Tech. About 12% of land in Afghanistan is arable, but only half is used for agriculture. While the South Asian country is rich in natural resources and capable of producing nutritious fruits, nuts, grains and vegetables, its agricultural potential remains stifled by factors including conflict, climate shocks, population movements and gender inequity. Over 11 million Afghans experience food insecurity. To address such barriers, USAID is investing in higher education in Afghanistan, with Virginia Tech leading efforts to improve education in agriculture. The recently awarded Advancing Higher Education for Afghanistan’s Development (AHEAD) program, led by FHI 360, aims to increase access to and improve the quality of higher education institutions (HEI) in Afghanistan. These efforts are manifested through partnerships with four U.S. and local universities that each facilitate different key growth sectors. Virginia Tech concentrates on agriculture, while the American University of Afghanistan focuses on business, the University of Massachusetts on education and the University of Minnesota on health sciences. AHEAD’s agricultural programming draws on Virginia Tech’s leadership in Afghanistan on another USAID-funded program, Catalyzing Afghan Agricultural Innovation (CAAI). CAAI supports Afghan-led agricultural innovation through capacity-building of research and extension actors, helping farmers and agribusinesses better face agricultural challenges. Both CAAI and Virginia Tech’s role in AHEAD are managed by the Center for International Research, Education, and Development (CIRED). A comprehensive partnership model based on Higher Education Networks (HENs) will address AHEAD’s HEI priorities in Afghanistan, such as curriculum improvement, pedagogical innovation, applied research, internship program facilitation and community outreach. The program’s three central capacity building objectives are: "The HEN model is very effective for the sustainability of HEIs in Afghanistan," said Wahid Omar, deputy chief of party of AHEAD at FHI 360. "It turns away from the traditional partnership model between one foreign university and a local university and moves toward an inter-Afghan network model, where technical support is provided based on needs and objectives of the program. This model is also an effective way of conducting business in light of the worldwide pandemic and an uncertain security situation." Based on the HEN model, Afghan universities have a mechanism by which to coordinate with U.S. universities. Virginia Tech, for example, is setting up its HEN with five Afghan universities and a technical institute. Based on the professional development priorities of Afghan partners, Virginia Tech faculty members will support workshops and peer-to-peer team building in research and teaching. "The premise is that academic disciplines can advance furthest if institutions collaborate to achieve common objectives in higher education," said Larry Vaughan, coordinator of Virginia Tech’s AHEAD activities. "Like many universities around the world, Virginia Tech unexpectedly accelerated its online teaching because of the pandemic. This hard-won experience will help the project undertake training and research activities at a distance to overcome security and health issues associated with hosting in-person events in Afghanistan." With collaboration among U.S. and Afghan universities, AHEAD’s aim is to build the resilience of and accessibility to Afghanistan’s higher education system with the ability to carry out their missions as easily online as in the classroom. At Virginia Tech, CIRED will especially be drawing on the agricultural expertise of faculty at the university's College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.