Opportunity type: Call for research proposals. Application deadline: July 6, 2021. Funding Amount: Reach grants — $750,000; Focus projects — $125,000. Link to application: https://livestocklab.ifas.ufl.edu/rfa/. A new call for research proposals has been launched by the Feed the Future Innovation Lab for Livestock Systems. This Request for Applications (RFA) intends to award grants to teams to conduct research in our five target countries of Burkina Faso, Niger, Rwanda, Ethiopia and Nepal. The first major deadline for applicants is to submit a concept note by July 6, 2021. The RFA guidelines are outlined on our website at https://livestocklab.ifas.ufl.edu/rfa/. To proceed, potential applicants should closely follow the guidance in the RFA guidelines document titled LSIL RFA 2021 (English). If questions remain, potential applicants may submit them to livestock-lab@ufl.edu no later than June 15, 2021. Questions submitted through other channels or after the June 15, 2021 deadline will not be considered. The answers to all correctly submitted questions will be posted on our website. A key requirement is partnership, as individuals are not eligible to apply. The applying team must include representatives from a target country and a Western country. This partnership model is evident in our previously-funded projects for our six target countries in Phase I (2015-2020). In comparison, Phase II (2020-2025) is focused on five countries and updated priorities, as explained in the RFA guideline document. Recordings and presentations from three webinars held in April 2021 are available online. The webinars informed potential grant applicants about key processes and revised areas of inquiry and cross-cutting themes. The webinar providing the broadest overview was "Preparing for the RFA's Release," and it addressed first-time applicants in particular. A second webinar targeted researchers with interest in public health, food safety and nutrition, and it explained our approach to "Research on Human Health, Food Safety, Diets & Nutrition. The third webinar invited U.S.-based researchers to learn about "Collaboration Opportunities for Minority Serving Institutions" and how USAID is encouraging their participation. Please review these materials and share them with potential applicants and partner organizations.