Each year, we have a $65 billion financing gap for agribusinesses in sub-Saharan Africa, and in other emerging economies, agribusinesses also can't get loans. Finance is fundamental for agribusinesses to be more productive, more sustainable, more resilient and produce the food we need to feed our growing population. Recently, during a webinar organized by Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), we asked the following question: "Is access to finance the main barrier to agricultural enterprise growth?" A whopping 79% of respondents said, "Yes." So, it is not a lack of awareness that stops us. Lack of funding may also not be a problem. We have spent billions of dollars on agricultural development projects throughout the world in the last decades. Total overseas development assistance (ODA) disbursements for agriculture have risen over 156% since 2002, standing at $10.2 billion in 2018. So what really stops us from solving this issue? Are we still clueless about what is needed to get agribusinesses banked? Do we need more awareness, more pilots, more projects, more funding? Or could it be that our way of working is actually part of the problem that keeps us spinning our wheels while not moving forward? You cannot solve a complex problem like access to finance for hundreds of thousands of agribusinesses with fragmented pilots, projects and programs. Complex problems have never been solved by this type of approach. What we need is an opposite way of thinking and working. If you want to solve a problem, as Franklin Covey says, "We need to start with the end in mind." We must have a vision of what is needed to solve the problem and get the results we want. To do this, we need to ask ourselves three powerful questions: If we want to solve this challenge, what would a systemic solution look like? What are the components or elements of this functioning systemic solution? And, how do we get there, and who needs to do what? We can then start working towards that solution and stop with well-intended, fragmented, unrelated projects that do not contribute to that vision. That is how we build systems that will enable scalable solutions. To build a lasting, systemic solution, four principles need to be in place: If we look around, we see these four operating principles functioning in all kinds of successful and scalable systems, like healthcare, airlines and aviation, education, banking, insurance, the Army and many more. In fact, a systemic solution cannot function without these operating principles, as we would be doomed to continue to work in a fragmented way, moving from project to project, focusing only on what we do and not what others need, operating in trial and error mode and creating suboptimization. Let's apply the same logic to the challenge of enabling hundreds of thousands of agribusinesses access to finance. What is already in place to build that systemic solution? What needs to be done to make this systemic solution operational? At SCOPEinsight, we see it as our mission to help build this systemic solution to enable access to finance for thousands of agribusinesses. Over the past 11 years, we have worked on these four core principles with partners. Now, it's time to move beyond the project phase and start putting the different components together, igniting the interoperability between the different actors and building a scalable, effective and efficient systemic solution. Why you need to work more in a systemic way to address the access to finance problem is the $10.2 billion question. It will eventually determine if we can solve the complex access to finance challenge and create incredible, synergetic, market-based benefits or continue to work in a fragmented and project-driven way. Here is how the above systemic solution can benefit you: Are you convinced that the next project will not solve the issue? Are you interested in joining a growing systemic solution? Are you interested in seizing the benefits and synergies of working together? We are looking for counterparts to join us in building a systemic solution to accessing finance for agribusiness. Contact marise.blom@scopeinsight.com to find out more, and let's build a systemic solution together!