This Request for Applications (RFA) is soliciting applications that strengthen the capacity of USAID Title II implementers to incorporate qualitative analysis into monitoring and evaluation. Applications will support the development, testing, packaging, and sharing of processes, systems, and tools to improve qualitative data collection, analysis, and utilization in support of USAID Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance strategy and policy. Specifically, it seeks to operationalize the qualitative component of the former FFP (BHA) Policy and Guidance for Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting for Development Food Security Activities V2.0 (P&G). For each grant, IDEAL will award no more than $100,000 US dollars for up to 12 months of implementation. Research applications should be submitted electronically and include the Narrative Research Application Template (Attachment 1), Qualitative Activity Schedule (Attachment 2), Budget Template (Attachment 3), Budget Narrative Template (Attachment 4), and Past Performance Information Request (Attachment 5). For more details about this request for applications, please refer to the documents below: Request for Applications (RFA): Qualitative Monitoring and Evaluation Program Improvement Awards (PIAs)
Attachment 1: Application Template
Attachment 2: Qualitative Activity Schedule
Attachment 3: Budget Template
Attachment 4: Budget Narrative Template
Attachment 5: Past Performance Information Request
Attachment 6: USAID Standard Provisions for FAAs for NGO Submissions are due by 5 PM ET on Friday, March 5, 2021. Applications must be submitted electronically to IDEAL_PIA@savechildren.org. Questions on this RFA may be submitted in writing to IDEAL_PIA@savechildren.org before Friday, February 5, 2021, 5 PM ET with "IDEAL Qualitative Monitoring and Evaluation Program Improvement Award RFA" and the name of the Lead Applicant as the subject line. Answers to submitted questions will be posted to the FSN Network website (www.fsnnetwork.org) by Friday, February 12, 2021, 5 PM ET. Prospective applicants are highly encouraged to attend our Orientation to IDEAL’s Qualitative M&E Program Improvement Award RFA to learn more about the application requirements and to ask any questions regarding the RFA.