Gisele Mukara is a young Congolese woman from Kalehe, South Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Livelihoods and economic opportunity in South Kivu have been strongly affected by disease and epidemics, outdated infrastructure, political instability and over 15 years of armed conflict between government and anti-government forces. Two years ago, Gisele, like many young women in her community, was unemployed and financially dependent on her husband. Through dedication, hard work and the training and encouragement she received through the Gender Action Learning System (GALS), a program implemented by USAID’s Feed the Future DRC Strengthening Value Chains (SVC) Activity, Gisele is now an entrepreneur. She bakes and sells bread in her community, earning a profit of 25,000 Congolese Francs (about USD $15.50) a week. The goal of the SVC activity is to increase household incomes in rural communities in South Kivu and improve access to nutrient rich crops. Empowering women, youth and marginalized groups to overcome entrenched inequities is key to the success of the activity. Giselle is one of more than 1,500 young men and women who have participated in the GALS training. The methodology emphasizes a shared recognition of both the resource and power inequities between men and women, and the unique economic challenges facing women, young people and the socially marginalized. Through participatory processes, visioning exercises and diagram tools, participants create individual, household and group visions, identifying economic opportunities and developing the skills and motivation to pursue them with their community’s support. GALS participants can increase their economic resilience and independence and gain more control over their own lives, spurring transformational change in themselves, their households and communities, organizations and beyond. Tetra Tech and its partner, Banyan Global, gained five critical insights into how GALS equips participants with the tools needed to identify economic opportunities, gain confidence and leverage the required resources to pursue these opportunities. After three years of implementing the GALS methodology in South Kivu, the SVC team has seen transformative results, including new economic initiatives for women and youth, improved money management skills, healthier lifestyle choices and decreased domestic violence. In February 2020, SVC’s Gender Youth and Social Inclusion team led a participatory assessment of the GALS intervention to document the most significant changes in participants’ lives related to gender equality and inclusion. The DRC SVC GALS Most Significant Study Technical Brief summarizes the assessment methodology and findings, providing further evidence of how the GALS training is replicating Gisele and many of her peers’ stories of successfully implementing their new visions of a more resilient and prosperous future. As Gisele reflects with a big smile, "Thanks to GALS, I became financially independent!"