USAID is seeking concept notes from qualified entities to implement the Feed the Future Innovation Lab for Food Systems for Nutrition program. Eligibility for this award is restricted to U.S. colleges and universities as defined under Section 296(d) of Title XII of the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA). USAID intends to make an award to the applicant who best meets the objectives of this funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in the Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) posted on Grants.gov, subject to a risk assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting a CN are encouraged to read the NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, concept note submission requirements and the selection process. Funding Opportunity Number: 7200AA21RFA00007
Program Title: Feed the Future Innovation Lab for Food Systems for Nutrition Posting Date: Tuesday, February 2, 2021
Deadline for Questions: Friday, February 12, 2021, 5:00 p.m. EST
Deadline for Concept Notes: Monday, March 8, 2021, 5:00 p.m. EST Please visit Grants.gov to view complete information about this opportunity. The Feed the Future Innovation Lab for Food Systems for Nutrition will design, lead and implement a program of nutrition-sensitive food system research and capacity building aimed at addressing the opportunities and challenges with the role of food systems in inclusive economic growth, nutrition, food safety, agriculture, gender-sensitive and youth inclusive development and resilience. The Food Systems for Nutrition Innovation Lab is broadly expected to help implement and communicate impact pathways from nutrition-sensitive food systems research to development outcomes through partnerships with USAID Mission-supported value chain programs, national partners, private companies and associations, community-based organizations and other donors and their programs. The Innovation Lab will deliver on this vision by a) strengthening the capacities of select country and regional research institutions to undertake research that is relevant and sound, to communicate findings in ways that are more likely to influence government partners, policymakers and practitioners, while b) implementing an integrated country, regional and global research agenda.